# trnet
Motivation: The Connectivity Map (CMap) dataset of the Broad Institute contains 1.3 million pre- and post-treatment gene expression profiles generated by high throughput screening and has been used for various biomedical tasks such as drug discovery and personalized medicine. Although the CMap dataset contains a considerably high number of profiles, it still covers only a fraction of existing drugs and cell lines. Moreover, not all the drugs in the CMap dataset are tested on all the cell lines. There exists a substantial number of drug-cell line pairs that have not been tested and hence their post-treatment gene expression profiles are not included in the dataset. Completing and expanding the dataset by conducting additional experiments on new drugs and cell lines is desirable but the cost of producing new data is too expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, needs arise for an accurate computational model that can predict drug-induced gene expression profiles. 
Results: We propose TRNet, a deep neural network-based transcriptional response prediction model, which takes the pre-treatment gene expression of a cell line, the structural information of a drug, the dosage and the duration of drug administration as input and predicts the post-treatment gene expression of the cell line. In our quantitative evaluation, TRNet outperformed other machine learning baseline models by at least 14.88\% (MSE), showing that the deep neural network architecture of TRNet is effective. In the qualitative analysis, we conducted a drug ATC code classification task using the post-treatment gene expression profiles predicted by TRNet and showed that the predicted profiles helped improve classification accuracy. Moreover, due to its deep neural network architecture, TRNet produces learned representations of drugs and cell lines, which are embedding vectors that capture not only the characteristics of drugs and cell lines but also the characteristics of their responses. We conducted a virtual drug screening study on learned drug representations and showed that they are effective in finding drug candidates. In summary, TRNet can complement the CMap dataset as it can virtually expand the dataset, facilitating broader downstream applications that may require greater coverage of drugs and cells. 
Contact: kangj@korea.ac.kr
